# Section 4: 15

---

15
Criteria for Death / Withholding Resuscitation /
Termination of Resuscitation
Criteria for Death / Withholding Resuscitation:
To provide guidelines for situations when initiation of resuscitative efforts by EMS Personnel is not appropriate . For patients with a valid Do-Not-Resuscitate
(DNR) order, please refer to the Do Not Resuscitate Policy.
Policy:
Resuscitative efforts should not be undertaken for an adult patient >18 years of age who is pulseless and apneic IF one or more of the following criteria are met:
q Decapitation
q Incineration
q Decomposition of Body Tissue
q Rigor Mortis and/or Dependent Lividity
q Massively Deforming Head or Chest Injury
q Freezing to the point of Rigor Mortis or inability to provide chest compressions
q Traumatic arrest that meets criteria according to Traumatic Arrest Protocol page 70
Do not initiate resuscitative measures for patients meeting the above criteria. Confirmation of asystole with a 4-lead cardiac monitor is acceptable if
appropriate for the situation. If resuscitative efforts are in progress, consider discontinuation of efforts (EMT-P only), or contact Medical Control for
consultation. If the patient is believed to have severe hypothermia (core temperature <82oF or <28oC), go to the Environmental, Hypothermia – Adult, Trauma
Protocol.
If the circumstances are unknown or unclear, or if there is question about the validity of a DNR order, initiate resuscitation while simultaneously contacting
On-Line Medical Control for further advice.
Termination of Resuscitation:
To provide guidelines for discontinuation of resuscitative efforts in the out-of-hospital environment, when attempts have not resulted in Return Of
Spontaneous Circulation (ROSC).
Policy:
The successful resuscitation of an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest requires a very well coordinated team effort, aggressive management of malignant
dysrhythmias and thoughtful consideration of the reversible causes of cardiac arrest (the proverbial H’s and T’s). Unfortunately, there are a significant number
of patients that – despite appropriate and aggressive medical management – are not able to achieve ROSC in the field. This policy is evidence driven and based
on best practice, and it is intended to provide guidance for arrests when it is more prudent to stop resuscitation efforts than to risk provider and public safety
with a patient transport.
This policy may ONLY be considered by EMT-Paramedics without Medical Control contact if ALL of the criteria below are met:
q The patient is an ADULT (>18 years of age) and the arrest is presumed to be of a primary cardiac origin
q The initial rhythm on patient contact is asystole
q The American Heart Association ACLS algorithm for cardiac arrest has been followed for a minimum of 20 minutes
q The airway has been secured with either an Endotracheal Tube (ETT) OR Blindly Inserted Airway Device (BIAD), and confirmed by digital capnography
q The quantitative End-tidal CO2 (EtCO2) is <20mmHg despite effective compressions and after 20 minutes of ACLS
q The final rhythm is asystole and is again confirmed in at least two leads on a printed strip
If ALL criteria above are NOT met, the ACLS algorithm must be followed for a minimum of 20 minutes and then Medical Control contacted for approval of field
termination of resuscitation if the patient does not achieve ROSC.
The EMS Provider always has the discretion to continue resuscitative efforts if provider safety, scene safety, location of arrest or bystander input compels the
decision.
q All pediatric cardiac arrest cases should be managed according to Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) guidelines and the International SOS EMS
Pediatric Cardiac Arrest Protocols.
q Notify law enforcement upon determination of patient death. If death occurs in a medical facility under supervision of medical personnel, you may
notify the patient’s primary physician directly. Once resuscitation efforts are withheld or discontinued, maintain respect for patient dignity and family
sensitivity. Ensure high situational awareness, as the scene may require investigation; avoid disturbing any potential evidence.
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
Policies
