# Section 7: 18

---

18
Policies
Purpose:
To provide guidelines and to set best practice for documentation of patient encounters in the electronic Patient Care Report (ePCR).
Policy:
As EMS Providers and out-of-hospital care becomes increasingly more important to the healthcare community , it has brought a focus on the
need to have a more robust set of standards for the Patient Care Reports generated. What you document is almost as important as what you
see and the interventions you make to help your sick and injured patients. To that end, these criteria should help set the standards for
documentation and maximize your productivity as members of the healthcare delivery team. At a minimum, every ePCR should include:
q A clear history of the present illness with chief complaint, onset time, associated complaints, pertinent positives and negatives, mechanism
of injury, etc. This should be included in the subjective portion of the PCR. The section should be sufficient to refresh the clinical situation
after it has faded from memory.
q Consider the P-SOAP-delta format for the narrative. Only approved medical abbreviations may be used – see Appendix.
 P – prearrival information, including delays to scene or factors inhibiting patient access or treatment
 S – subjective information (what the patient tells the EMS Provider)
 O – objective information (VS, physical exam findings, etc.)
 A – assessment (EMS Provider Impression of patient illness as well as differential diagnosis)
 P – plan of treatment (EMS Provider interventions planned to administer)
 Delta – change in patient condition due to EMS Provider interventions
q An appropriate physical assessment that includes all relevant portions of a head -to-toe physical exam. When appropriate, this information
should be included in the procedures section of the PCR.
q Vital Signs (VS) play a critical role in patient assessment and evaluations, and must be documented in the ePCR for any patient. At least two
complete sets of vital signs. A complete set of vitals includes:
 Pulse Rate, Systolic AND Diastolic Blood Pressure, Respiratory Rate, SpO2, Pain and GCS for trauma patients. Temperature, EtCO2,
Level of Awareness are also encouraged.
q These vital signs should be repeated and documented after drug administration , prior to patient transfer, and as needed during transport.
Any abnormal VS should be followed closely, and repeated as indicated by change in patient subjective status or clinical condition . Vital
signs should be included in the ePCR either via manual entry or a monitor to ePCR integration. Incorrect vitals imported from the monitor
integration should be updated as needed.
q The CAD to PCR interface embedded within the PCR system should be used to populate all PCR data fields it supplies. When 9-1-1 center
times are improperly recorded, these may be edited as necessary.
q Medications administered, dosages, route, administration time, treatments delivered and patient response.
q Extremity neurovascular status after splinting affected limb, or all limbs after spinal immobilization.
q For IV administration, the catheter size, site, number of attempts, type of fluid, and flow rate.
q Requested Medical Control orders and whether approved or denied.
q Any waste of controlled medications should include the quantity wasted , where wasted, and name of the person who witnessed the waste.
Hospital personnel should be utilized (if available) to witness.
q ALL crew members are responsible for, and should review, the content of the ePCR for accuracy.
q After the ePCR is closed, patient care information may not be modified for any reason. Corrections or additions should be in the form of an
addendum to the ePCR, with note for the reason of the addendum.
q When possible, all ePCRs should be completed and the report closed within 24 hours of the incident.
q Paper copies of the ECG, DNR paperwork, Skilled Nursing Facility documentation and - when applicable - documentation of refusal to
accept an appropriate assessment, treatment, or hospital destination shall be provided to the receiving hospital.
q If the patient refuses EMS evaluation, an assessment of capacity must be completed AND documented in the ePCR . Detailed
documentation should be captured regarding the patient’s clinical presentation, reason for refusing (if known) and the refusal process in
the ePCR narrative. Be sure to capture the names of family members, Law Enforcement personnel or other EMS personnel who are present
for this conversation and evaluation.
q If patient transported from the scene with red lights and siren, be sure to document the reason for doing so.
Remember – if you didn’t document it, it never happened!
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
Documentation of Patient Care & Vital Signs
