# Section 9: 20

---

20
Emergency Interhospital Transfers
Policies
Purpose:
To provide guidelines for EMS Provider expectations and medical care of patients during emergent transfer between Hospitals . This Policy does
not supersede or replace existing EMTALA regulations.
This Policy IS NOT intended to authorize services or care that are not part of an EMS Services ’ operational plan with the State of Wisconsin.
Rather, it is intended to provide guidance for the rare but foreseeable circumstances when a critically ill or injured patient may ne ed to be
rapidly moved to a higher level of care, and time is of the essence.
Policy:
IEMS providers should perform emergent interhospital transfers primarily for patients with Time-Critical Diagnoses (TCDs) requiring specialized
care not immediately available. During Mass Casualty Incidents (MCIs) or when Crisis Standards of Care are activated, EMS Medical Directors or
their designees should provide real-time guidance. If EMS providers receive requests for emergent interhospital transfers of non-TCD patients,
consult your EMS supervisor prior to transport.
Emergent Interhospital Transport decisions should be made based on the needs of the patient(s), any expected changes in their clinical condition
and the familiarity / comfort level of the responding EMS Providers with the clinical situation as well as any medications or devices being used .
If a patient is unstable, receiving medications, or using medical devices beyond the EMS provider’s scope of practice or familiarity, the sending
facility must supply an appropriately credentialed provider familiar with the medications and equipment for the entire transfer. Contact your EMS
Supervisor immediately if difficulties arise with this requirement.
Clear communication and coordination between hospitals and EMS providers are essential prior to initiating an emergent interhospital transfer to
ensure patient safety and appropriate medical care during transport. Responsibilities for patient care must be clearly established before departing
the sending facility. If the patient unexpectedly deteriorates during transport, notify the sending facility immediately, but contact the receiving
facility for additional Medical Control guidance. Follow the International SOS EMS Protocols as appropriate until further direction is received.
Unless extenuating circumstances exist (e.g., Mass Casualty Incident, Crisis Standards of Care), EMS providers performing emergent interhospital
transfers should deliver patients directly to the receiving facility’s Emergency Department for further care and coordination.
As with any Protocol, contact On-Line Medical Control with any questions or concerns.
~ This Space Intentionally Left Blank ~
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
