# Section 10: 21

---

21
Lights and Sirens During Patient Transport
Policies
Purpose:
To provide guidelines for the appropriate use of red lights and siren when transporting a patient from the scene of an emergency to the
hospital. This Policy intends to help identify patients for whom safe use of red lights and siren can potentially reduce morbidity and mortality,
and eliminate the unnecessary use of emergency lights and siren during transport to improve patient comfort, reduce anxiety and enhance
safety for the patient, the EMS team, and the Dane County community. It is impossible to clearly identify each scenario where a patient could
benefit from the use of lights and sirens by EMS, so provider discretion must be used to weigh the potential benefit of time saved against the
ability for prehospital interventions to stabilize patients.
Policy:
q Use of lights and siren during response to the incident location should be dictated by local department policy.
q At the discretion of the ambulance crew, driving with lights and siren may be considered if the following clinical conditions or circumstances
exist:
 Difficulty in sustaining the ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation) including (but not limited to):
q Inability to establish an adequate airway or ventilation.
q Severe respiratory distress or respiratory injury not responsive to available field treatment.
q Inability to correct hemodynamic instability.
q Severe uncontrolled hemorrhage.
q Shock, unresponsive to available treatment.
q Severe trauma resulting in hemodynamic compromise, airway instability, or neurovascular compromise of an extremity that
cannot be managed or corrected in the field.
q Status epilepticus that is not responsive to prehospital interventions.
q Substantial or rapidly deteriorating level of consciousness.
q Obstetrical emergencies such as prolapsed cord, breech presentation, arrested delivery, or suspected ruptured ectopic pregnancy.
q For any transport where reducing time to definitive care is clinically indicated, consider options other than emergent driving. In these
cases, an alternative mode of transportation or higher level of care (such as ALS intercept, physician response vehicles, or air-medical)
should be considered if it is available and appropriate.
q For any lights and siren transport, specifically document in the narrative the patient’s condition, case circumstances and the rationale for
choosing emergent transport.
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
~ This Space Intentionally Left Blank ~
