# Section 11: 22

---

22
Non-Paramedic Transport of Patients
Policies
Purpose:
To provide guidelines for interactions of EMS Providers while on scene, and to help guide determination of the most appropriate level of service
to transport patients to the Emergency Department.
This policy is intended to clarify expectations of providers on scene during situations when multiple levels of provider with transport capability
arrive concurrently. It is NOT intended to be used as justification for refusal of transfer to a Paramedic level of service when a lower level is
requesting it.
Policy:
For the purposes of this protocol, “Paramedic” refers to an EMS provider credentialed by the International SOS EMS System with no current
restrictions on their clinical practice.
The provider with the highest credential level on scene will perform a detailed patient assessment, including interview and physical examination, to
identify the chief complaint and level of distress. If the provider determines the patient is stable and that all care can safely be managed by a lowerlevel EMS provider, patient care and transport responsibilities may be transferred accordingly. All personnel on scene should actively participate in
patient care, regardless of who ultimately attends the patient during transport.
The determination of who attends should be based on the patient’s immediate treatment needs and any reasonably anticipated treatment needs
while en route to the hospital. The highest credentialed provider on scene retains the right to make the decision to personally attend to any
patient transported based on his or her impression of the patient’s clinical conditions, current needs or anticipated needs based on the EMS
Provider’s evaluation and experience.
The highest credentialed EMS Provider who performs the assessment and determines the appropriate level of care for transport must document
the findings of their assessment. Additional documentation shall be completed by the transporting provider. As with all documentation, both
providers are responsible for the content of the report.
Patients who meet the criteria below shall be attended by Paramedics (per their operational plan) in the patient care compartment, unless mass
casualty incident, natural disaster or previously approved by policy or the On-Line Medical Control. The care of the following patients cannot be
transferred to a lower level of credentialing:
q Any patient who requires or might reasonably require additional or ongoing medications, procedures AND/OR monitoring beyond the
scope of practice of the lower credentialed provider. This includes any critically ill or unstable patient as advanced airway management
may be required in any decompensating patient. EMT-Basic and EMT-Advanced providers may be credentialed to perform some but not all
airway management, and medications associated with airway management are limited to the Paramedic scope of practice by the Wisconsin
State Medical Board.
q Any patient for whom ALL EMS providers on scene do not agree can be safely transported without a Paramedic in attendance in t he patient
care compartment. As a general rule, if providers are questioning who should attend the patient, the highest credentialed level of care
should attend.
q Post-ictal patients with high probability of recurrent seizure.
q Patients who have been medicated on the scene cannot be transferred to a provider of a lower credentialing level UNLESS the provided
medication is included in the receiving EMS Provider’s scope.
~ This Space Intentionally Left Blank ~
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
