# Section 13: 24

---

24
Patient Care During Transport
Policies
Purpose:
To provide general guidelines and to set best practice when caring for patients both on the scene of an emergency as well as in the ambulance
during transport to the receiving facility.
Policy:
All sick or injured persons requesting transport shall be transported without delay to the most appropriate Emergency Departm ent, with high
consideration given to patient preference. Exceptions to this policy are as follows:
q An "appropriate local Emergency Department" includes facilities designated by International SOS EMS Protocols within the operational region.
A patient’s ability to pay or insurance status must not influence destination decisions. If transport requests impact EMS unit availability,
contact your EMS Supervisor for guidance prior to initiating transport.
q All sick or injured persons requesting transport who do not express a preference or who rely on the knowledge of the EMS Provider should be
transported to the closest, most appropriate local Emergency Department.
q Patients who are suffering from a Time Critical Diagnosis (TCD) or a condition covered under the Destination Determination Protocols should
be transported in accordance with the specialty resource required by the treatment flowchart . All other patients should be transported per
the policy statement above.
q Transport destination decisions should take into consideration the preexisting healthcare relationships that a patient may ha ve. In general, a
patient should be taken to the hospital at which they typically receive care and/or where their primary care physician has affiliation, unless
the patient expressly requests otherwise. Providers should discuss risks and benefits of transport to a facility that has not previously cared for
the patient, and document the discussion clearing in the electronic Patient Care Report (ePCR).
The following situations shall require more than one EMS Provider in the passenger compartment of the transporting vehicle , to provide
adequate medical care. The additional provider(s) is/are present not only to serve as additional “hands”, but to expand the critical thinking of
the team and to help optimize patient outcomes. For these circumstances, students with the current training permit may assist with patient
care, but may NOT count as one of the additional EMS Providers.
q Cardiac Arrest of Medical OR Traumatic etiology
q Post Resuscitation Return of Spontaneous Circulation (ROSC) patients, even if Vital Signs are stable
q Active Airway Management, regardless of modality chosen (Endotracheal Tube, Blindly Inserted Airway Device (BIAD) or Bag-Valve Mask
(BVM)
q Impending Arrest or “Peri-Code” Situation
q Imminent Delvery
q Newly Born Patients (Mother and Newborn count as two patients, and require an attendant for each)
q At the Attending EMS Provider’s Judgement, for cases not covered above
If a second EMS Provider is not available and transport would be delayed, initiation may be started under these two circumstances:
q An Advanced Care Intercept (Ground ALS or HEMS) has been contacted and arrangements made for rendezvous en route
OR
q The case has been reviewed with On-Line Medical Control (OLMC) AND approval granted
~ This Space Intentionally Left Blank ~
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
