# Section 14: 25

---

25
Medical Provider Bystander On Scene
Policies
Purpose:
To define the responsibilities of EMS Providers responding to an emergency scene , to identify the chain of command and to prevent potential
conflicts regarding patient care that may arise during EMS evaluation and management when a trained medical provider is on sc ene. No other
healthcare professionals are permitted to provide medical direction under this policy.
This policy is not intended to apply to Service Medical Directors.
Policy:
The medical evaluation and management of patients at an emergency scene is the responsibility of the EMS provider operating under International
SOS EMS Protocols. On occasion, a physician or medical provider present may wish to assume patient care or direct EMS personnel. To assume
care, the physician must:
 Provide photo identification verifying his/her current credentialing as a physician (MD/DO) AND a current copy of his/her license to practice
medicine in the State of Wisconsin AND
 Assume care of the patient AND allow documentation of of his/her assumption of care on the electronic Patient Care Report (ePCR), as
verified by his/her signature, AND
 Agree to accompany the patient during transport to the receiving hospital AND
 Not appear to be impaired or under the influence of drugs, alcohol or medical conditions AND
 Explicitly express willingness to accept liability for the care provided to the patient under their personal medical license
Contact with Medical Control must be established as soon as possible, and the Medical Control Physician must agree to relinquish responsibility
for patient care to the Physician On Scene.
Once care has been transferred from the On-Line Medical Control to the Physician On Scene, the EMS Provider may provide care under the
license and authority of the Physician On Scene. Direction provided by the Physician On Scene assuming care of the patient should be followed
by the EMS Provider, granted that the interventions are not believed by the EMS Provider to endanger the well -being of the patient.
Orders from an authorized on-scene physician may be followed, even if they differ from existing protocols, provided they involve only skills or
medications within the EMS provider’s approved scope of practice and credentialing. Under no circumstances shall EMS providers perform
procedures or administer medications outside their authorized scope of practice.
Conflict with Physician or Medical Provider On Scene:
If the Physician or Medical Provider On Scene is judged by the EMS Provider on scene to be potentially harmful or dangerous t o the patient, the
EMS Provider should politely voice their objection, and immediately contact On-Line Medical Control for further assistance. On-Line Medical
Control should be briefed by the EMS Provider, and the Physician or Medical Provider On Scene allowed to communicate directly with the OnLine Medical Control. When at all possible, these conversations should be held on a recorded line.
If the Physician or Medical Provider Bystander On Scene and On-Line Medical Control are in conflict, it is the responsibility of the EMS Provider to:
q Follow the directions of On-Line Medical Control
q Enlist the aid of Law Enforcement as necessary to regain control of the emergency scene and resume authority of the scene
Documentation:
All interactions with Physicians and Medical Providers On Scene must be thoroughly documented in the electronic Patient Care Report (ePCR),
including the full name and medical license number, as well as the interventions performed at their direction.
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
