# Section 15: 26

---

26
Poison Control
Policies
Purpose:
To provide guidelines for involving Poison Control with out-of-hospital management of patients with potential or actual poisonings.
Policy:
Patients who have sustained significant poisonings, envenomations, and environmental/biochemical terrorism exposures in the out-of-hospital
setting require timely and appropriate level of care, including the decisions regarding scene treatment and transport destination. By integrating
the State Poison Center into the out-of-hospital response plan for HazMat and biochemical terrorism incidents, this policy aims to empower the
out-of-hospital care provider and enhance the ability to deliver the most appropriate care to the patient possible.
If the patient is assessed by the EMS Provider and no immediate life threat or indication for immediate transport is identifi ed, the EMS Provider
may conference call with the Poison Center at the Wisconsin State Poison Center at 1 (800) 222-1222.
The Poison Center will help evaluate the exposure and make recommendations regarding the need for on -site treatment and hospital transport
in a timely manner. If EMS transport to the hospital is determined to be necessary, the Poison Center will contact the receiving hospital and
provide information regarding the poisoning, including treatment recommendations. EMS may also contact On-Line Medical Control for further
instructions or for treatment options.
If EMS transport is determined to not be necessary, the contact phone number for the patient will be provided to the Poison Center. The
Poison Center will make a minimum of one follow-up phone call to determine the status of the patient. Additionally, the EMS Provider must
contact On-Line Medical Control to review the case and discuss the recommendations of the Poison Center and what is believed to be in the
best interest of the patient.
As detailed elsewhere in this document, exposures and/or poisonings that are the result of suicide attempts or gestures, or children who sustain
an exposure and/or poisoning due to child abuse or neglect SHOULD NOT be allowed to refuse transport. These are both vulnerable
populations who are at an increased risk of death or permanent disability if not cared for appropriately . As always, good Provider judgment and
patient advocacy will be the cornerstones of making sound, defensible patient treatment decisions.
In any cases of poisoning, whether accidental, intentional or the consequence of a bioterrorism event, the safety of the First Responders should
be of the highest priority. At a minimum, the following information should be gathered so that the Poison Center can make the best
recommendations for the current situation:
q Age of the patient
q Substance(s) involved with the exposure (if known)
q Time and Duration of exposure (if known)
q Signs and Symptoms
q Any Treatments provided and the response to the intervention
As with many of the EMS Protocols, a significant amount of information is collected by the EMS Providers on scene and can be extremely
valuable for downstream providers. Be sure to notice and document HazMat placards in cases of transportation incidents, any MSDS sheets
available in the industrial / manufacturing setting, or the contents and volumes of products / substances present in the cases of household
ingestion.
~ This Space Intentionally Left Blank ~
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
