# Section 16: 27

---

27
Patients in Police Custody
Policies
Purpose:
To provide guidelines for the evaluation and management of patients requiring EMS assessment while in the custody of Law Enforcement. As
with every patient interaction, it is important that the EMS Provider serve as a patient advocate and use their best medical judgment to assist
Law Enforcement in making safe, appropriate decisions regarding medical aid and disposition decisions.
Policy:
When evaluating a patient in law enforcement custody, EMS providers should treat the patient with the same respect and consideration as any
other patient. EMS providers are not authorized to provide “Medical Clearance” for detention. Providers must perform an unbiased medical
assessment and make recommendations based on International SOS EMS Protocols, clinical judgment, and experience.
These patient encounters have a higher than average incidence of scrutiny on review; as such, take steps to ensure that your documentation is
clear, descriptive and complete. Law Enforcement Agent names and badge numbers are essential in the EMS Provider documentation.
q If a patient in custody of Law Enforcement is evaluated by EMS and felt to need transport to the Emergency Department and the patient is
refusing transport:
 Evaluate the patient’s capacity to make informed decisions according to International SOS EMS Protocols.
 Advise the Law Enforcement Agent of the decision of the patient, and consider potential risks or hazards to Law Enforcement if the
patient were to refuse (i.e. lacerations that may pose a biohazard to officers or other detainees).
q If Law Enforcement requests transport, document their request and coordinate safe transport to the closest, most appropriate
Emergency Department. In these instances, the Law Enforcement Agent must take the patient into Protective Custody and effectively
making decisions as the healthcare power of attorney for the patient.
q Document that Law Enforcement has taken Protective Custody of the patient.
q In this instance, the Law Enforcement Agent must accompany the patient to the Emergency Department.
 If the patient is evaluated to have capacity and does not pose an undue risk to law enforcement, document a patient refusal according to
International SOS EMS Protocols.
q If a patient in custody of Law Enforcement is evaluated by EMS and felt to need transport to the Emergency Department and the Law
Enforcement Agent is refusing transport:
 Advise law enforcement that transport is medically indicated per International SOS EMS Protocols, and clarify that EMS providers are not
authorized to provide medical clearance in the field.
 Contact On-Line Medical Control for consultation and assistance as needed.
q If Law Enforcement continues to decline transport for medical evaluation and management, allow the patient to remain in the
custody of the Law Enforcement Agent, and advise them that EMS may be re-contacted at any time to provide medical assistance as
needed.
q The Law Enforcement Agent in these situations is taking the patient into Protective Custody and effectively making decisions as the
healthcare power of attorney for the patient.
q Document that Law Enforcement has taken Protective Custody of the patient.
 Document the Law Enforcement Agency as well as the name and badge number of the responsible officer along with specifics of t he
discussion in your electronic Patient Care Report (ePCR).
q If a patient in custody of Law Enforcement requires transport to the Emergency Department and is requiring physical restraint by the Law
Enforcement Agent for behavior modification:
 Advise law enforcement personnel that International SOS EMS Protocols require their presence in the patient compartment of the
ambulance during transport to the Emergency Department.
q With active restraints in place, it is an issue of patient safety as well as provider safety.
 Refer to the Behavioral Emergencies section of the International SOS EMS Protocols, or contact Online Medical Control for guidance
regarding medication management to ensure safe and efficient transport.
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
