# Section 17: 28

---

28
Radio Report Format
Purpose:
To provide guidelines for clear communication between EMS Providers and receiving facilities prior to delivery of the patient.
Policy:
For all patients being transported to the hospital by EMS, every effort should be made to contact the receiving facility as early as possible once
the destination facility has been chosen and transport initiated.
Procedure:
Begin each transmission with the agency name and unit number, and wait for acknowledgement from the receiving facility.
After the receiving facility acknowledges contact with your unit, give a clear, concise report which includes the following:
q Agency Unit
q ETA
q If applicable; Alerts – Medical, Trauma, STEMI, Stroke, Sepsis (repeat this twice)
q Age
q Chief Complaint / Observations
Vital Signs – Brief and Concise
Pertinent Interventions
Special Resources/Needs – interpreter, respiratory therapy, security, bariatric, cath lab, labor/delivery, etc.
Contacting Medical Control
q Medical Control may be contacted for any additional orders, to consult as needed for patients refusing transport and for any questions
regarding patient management on scene or en route to the receiving facility. Any orders given should be repeated back for clarification and
patient safety.
q Make sure your request of Medical Control is clearly communicated, and be prepared to answer follow up questions regarding the protocol
you are following as well as your assessment of the situation.
Remember: you are the one who has the patient in front of you – your assessment and impression matter!
CATEGORY
Medical ALERT
Trauma ALERT
DEFINITION
High acuity of illness, with unstable VS or requiring
immediate support from ED staff
Severe mechanism of injury, life or limb threatening injury
SEPSIS ALERT
STEMI ALERT
SEPSIS Screening Positive
STEMI Interpretation of Field ECG (EMS or Monitor)
STROKE ALERT Focal Neurologic Deficit with Last Known Normal <24 Hours
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
Policies
~ This Space Intentionally Left Blank ~
