# Section 18: 29

---

29
Transfer of Care at Hospital
Policies
Purpose:
To provide guidelines for in-person communication with receiving facilities, and to clarify expectations of EMS Provider documentation.
Policy:
When delivering a patient to the receiving facility, it is imperative that a clear, concise communication happen between the EMS Provider and
the emergency medical staff assuming care. In order to prevent miscommunication, a full verbal report should be communicated in a face-toface fashion, preferably with the entire medical team assembled at the patient bedside. On the occasion that the complete team is not
available, verbal report should be given to a receiving caregiver credentialed at the RN level or higher.
All treatments and interventions initiated under the Dane County Protocols may be continued after arrival in the receiving fa cility up until the
appropriate personnel and equipment are assembled to assume care of the patient. At that time, responsibility for all medical care and
continued treatment is transferred to the facility, and the Dane County EMS Protocols are no longer authorized for patient management. OnLine Medical Control should not be contacted for additional orders once this handoff has occurred. In the rare circumstance that the EMS
Provider is requested/invited to participate, direction will be at the authorization and the discretion of the supervising on-scene physician. It is
important that the involvement, orders received and name of the responsible physician be captured in the electronic Patient Care Report
(ePCR) as part of the medical care provided by EMS.
Verbal Report
Verbal report at the time of handoff shall include all pertinent known information about the patient, the history of present illness or mechanism
of injury, treatments administered by EMS Providers as well as the patient’s responses to treatment. In addition, all prehospital ECGs and
provided paper medical records should be turned over to the treatment team assuming care .
Written Report
Wisconsin DHS Administrative Rule 110.34(7) specifically addresses EMS responsibility for written patient report at the time of handoff at the
receiving facility. The rule states:
An emergency medical service provider shall, “...submit a written report to the receiving hospital upon delivering a patient, and a complete
patient care report within 24 hours of patient delivery. A written report may be a complete patient care report or other documentation
approved by the department and accepted by the receiving hospital.”
The expectation is that there will be written documentation left at the receiving facility, and conveyed either in printed or electronic format
prior to your departure and returning available to service. It is not required that the documentation left at the facility be the completed,
finalized electronic Patient Care Report (ePCR). HOWEVER, all EMS Providers in Dane County are integral members of the healthcare team, and
may hold key pieces of information not available to any of the downstream providers and which are at significant risk of being lost, overlooked
or miscommunicated if not documented in a prompt manner.
Given the nature of EMS and out-of-hospital care, it should be the goal of every Dane County EMS Service at minimum to have a draft narrative ,
list of the EMS interventions, medications given and vital signs documented prior to leaving the facility and returning to duty.
~ This Space Intentionally Left Blank ~
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
