# Section 19: 30

---

30
Persons with EMS Care Plans
Policies
Purpose:
To establish a uniform approach for the evaluation and management of persons having an established Care Plan , developed by the EMS Service
and approved by the Medical Director.
Policy:
All sick or injured persons requesting transport shall be transported without delay to an appropriate local Emergency Departm ent of the
patient’s preference. The only exceptions to this rule are found below:
q Patients who are suffering from a Time Critical Diagnosis (TCD) or whose condition is covered under the Destination Determination
Protocols shall be transported in accordance with those specialty algorithms to the appropriate receiving facility . The presence of a Care
Plan DOES NOT supersede the Destination Determination Protocol.
q Patients known to have been discharged from an Emergency Department within the last 48 hours should generally be transported back to
the same ED, unless they meet specialty center destination criteria, as outlined in the Destination Determination Protocol.
q Patients who have been identified as frequent users of the EMS System may have a designated Care Plan, which has been developed with
the patient and/or their healthcare providers, the EMS Service and one or more of the Dane County hospitals. If a patient has a formal Care
Plan approved by the EMS Service Medical Director, the patient should be evaluated, treated and transported in accordance with the Plan,
unless the patient meets criteria for transport to a specialty receiving center, as outlined above. Regardless of the existence of a Care Plan,
all patients should be treated with respect and dignity, and fully evaluated as per the standards set forth in this Protocol Book.
There may be exceptions to this guideline, and if there are questions while evaluating a patient with a Care Plan, do not hesitate to contact the
Officer In Charge (OIC) or the Medical Director or Medical Director’s designee for clarification.
~ This Space Intentionally Left Blank ~
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
