# Section 21: 32

---

32
Airway Management - Adult
Pearls
REQUIRED EXAM: VS, GCS, Head, Neck, Blood Glucose
 If BIAD in place and adequately ventilating/oxygenating - Do Not Remove.
 Digital capnography is the standard of care and is to be used with all methods of advanced airway management and endotracheal intubation. If a service uses color change
capnometry only and an Invasive Airway Device is placed, an intercept with a digital capnography capable service MUST be completed.
 Goal EtCO₂ = 35-45mmHg.
 If Airway Management is adequately maintained with a Bag-Valve Mask and waveform SpO2 >93%, it is acceptable to defer advanced airway placement in favor of basic
maneuvers and rapid transport to the hospital.
 Always assume that patient reports of dyspnea and shortness of breath are physiologic, not psychogenic.
 Gastric decompression with Oral Gastric Tube should be considered on all patients with advanced airways, if time and situation allow.
 Once secured, every effort should be made to keep the endotracheal tube in the airway; commercially available tube holders and C-collars are good adjuncts.
 For all protocols, an Advanced Airway Attempt is defined as: passing the tip of the laryngoscope blade or Blindly Inserted Airway Device (BIAD) tube past the teeth.
Medical Protocols - Adult
General Approach – Adult, Medical
Notify Receiving Facility,
Contact Medical Control As Necessary
Basic Airway Maneuvers
(Open Airway, Suction, NPA vs. OPA)
BVM with airway adjunct
Consider Advanced Airway
Placement ETT, BIAD
P
Consider Rapid Sequence Airway
Protocol p33
Evaluate and Treat Per Appropriate
Adult, Medical Protocol
Anticipate and Prepare for the
Difficult Airway
LEMON Rule
 Look Externally
 Evaluate with 3:3:2 Rule
 Mallampati Classification
 Obstruction
 Neck Mobility (or lack thereof)
If obstruction suspected, Go to Airway
Obstruction Procedure p132
Assess Airway
(obstruction, blood, vomit, FB, etc.)
A,B,C’s
(RR, effort, adequacy)
Adequate
Inadequate
Each Attempt should include change in approach,
operator and/or equipment
If endotracheal tube placement is attempted, after
two (2) unsuccessful attempts move towards
alternative airway device
P
Consider Surgical Airway p148-150
If unable to oxygenate/ventilate with any
other less invasive method
Consider early if sign of facial trauma/swelling/
distortion or complete obstruction
Post Advanced Airway Sedation
Protocol p34
Evaluate and Treat Per Appropriate
Adult, Medical Protocol
Unsuccessful Successful
Unobstructed
Consider Need for ALS Level Service
Post Advanced Airway Sedation Protocol p34
Evaluate and Treat Per Appropriate Adult, Medical
Protocol
Consider CPAP Procedure p146
For respiratory distress with intact airway
protection
Consider Midazolam 2mg IV/IN or
Ketamine 0.25mg/kg IV/IM/IO (max 25mg)
If needed for CPAP compliance
Obstructed
B
P
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
