# Section 33: P

---

P
Consider External Cardiac Pacing Procedure
p159
A
Consider IVF bolus IV/IO, repeat as
indicated for patient condition
Continuous Cardiac Monitor
Supplemental O2 to maintain SpO2 >93%
44
Bradycardia With A Pulse - Adult
Pearls
REQUIRED EXAM: VS, GCS, RR, Lung Sounds, Cardiac Exam, JVD
 Not all cases of bradycardia need to be treated with medicine or pacing; use good clinical judgement and follow symptoms.
 Continually monitor for signs of decompensation and be prepared to move to external cardiac pacing if the patient condition changes. Place the pads while reaching for the
meds.
 Atropine is unlikely to work in cases of complete heart block. Atropine is contraindicated in patients with narrow angle glaucoma.
 Elderly patients, diabetics and women are more likely to have atypical chest pain – SOB, fatigue, weakness, back pain, jaw pain.
 Have a low threshold to get a 12-Lead ECG. They are minimally invasive, painless and can evolve with time.
Medical Protocols - Adult
Pertinent Positives and Negatives
 Age, VS, SpO2, EtCO2, RR
 SAMPLE History
 OPQRST History
 CHF, CAD, Chest Pain History
 QRS <0.12 sec (<3 small squares)
Differential
 Pericardial Tamponade
 Pericarditis
 Pacemaker Failure
 Hypothermia
 Sinus Bradycardia
 Home meds prior to EMS Arrival
(Digoxin, Lasix, ASA, Viagra, Cialis)
 Respiratory Distress
 Orthopnea, JVD
 Head Injury
 Spinal Cord Injury
 Sick Sinus Syndrome
 Acute MI
 AV Block (1
o
, 2
o
, 3
o
)
General Approach – Adult, Medical
A IV Access Protocol p49
Notify Receiving Facility,
Contact Medical Control As Necessary
HR <60bpm AND
Unstable / Imminent
Arrest
Yes
Yes Symptomatic No Look for and Treat Underlying Causes
Consider Specific Overdose and Poisoning
Protocol p54
Go To STEMI Treatment Protocol
p42 STEMI
P
Atropine 1.0mg IV/IO
May Repeat every 3-5min; Max 3mg
Improving
P
Epinephrine (1:1,000) 2-10 mcg/min IV/IO
Titrate to SBP>100, MAP>65,
OR signs of improved perfusion
No
P
Consider push dose Epi 5-20mcg p190
every 1-2 minutes SBP>100, MAP >65,
or signs of improved perfusion
B EMT
A A-EMT
P Paramedic
M Medical Control
EMR
P
External Cardiac Pacing Procedure
p159
Consider analgesia/sedation
P
Fentanyl 1mcg/kg IV/IO (max 100mcg)
AND / OR
P
Midazolam 0.1mg/kg IV/IO (max 5mg) or
0.2 mg/kg IM/IN (max 10mg)
OR
Lorazepam 0.1mg/kg IV/IO/IM (max 2mg)
12-Lead ECG Procedure
p129
Consider SEPSIS Screening p62
No
Yes
Consider Hypotension / Shock (Non-Trauma)
Protocol p63
