# Section 123: 134

---

134
Adult Endotracheal Intubation - Procedures
When Considering Intubating Any Patient, Prepare Materials EARLY:
q Laryngoscope handle with appropriate size blade
q Proper Size Endotracheal Tube (ETT) PLUS Backup ETT 0.5-1.0mm smaller and BIAD
q Water-soluble lubrication gel, (lubricate distal end of tube at cuff)
q 10cc syringe (larger syringe if low pressure cuff)
q Stylet, (insert into ET tube and do no let stylet extend beyond tip of ET tube) – if not already incorporated into ETT
q Tape or ETT securing device
q Proper size oral pharyngeal airway
q BVM
q Oxygen Source
q Suction Device
q Stethoscope
q Continuous Digital Waveform Capnography
q Oxygen saturation monitor
q Medications to maintain and support hemodynamic stability (fluids, infusions, push-dose epinephrine, etc.)
Procedure:
q 1. Maintain cervical alignment and immobilization, as necessary
q 2. Attach proper blade to laryngoscope handle and check light
q 3. Check endotracheal tube cuff, lubricate distal end of the tube
q 4. Confirm patient attached to cardiac monitor and oxygen saturation monitor
q 5. Ready ETCO2 detection device
q 6. Specify personnel to:
 Maintain cervical alignment and immobilization during procedure
 Watch cardiac and oxygen saturation monitors
q 7. Preoxygenate patient with 100% Oxygen (BVM or NRB) before intubation attempt to achieve O2 saturation >93% or 8 vital capacity
breaths.
q 8. Remove all foreign objects, such as dentures, Oropharyngeal Airways (OPA), etc., and suction the patients airway if needed.
 May leave an esophageal ETT if prior unsuccessful attempt to use as landmark for second attempt
q 9. Insert the blade into the right side of the patient’s mouth sweeping the tongue to the left side
q 10. Visualize the vocal cords while avoiding any pressure on the teeth
q 11. Insert the endotracheal tube until the cuff passes the vocal cords.
 Insert far enough so that balloon port tubing is even with the lips
 Typical depth = tube size (ID) x3 (example would be tube depth of 24 for a 8.0mm tube)
q 12. Remove the laryngoscope blade
q 13. Inflate the endotracheal cuff with the syringe with 5-10cc of air (low pressure cuff may require larger volume) and remove the
syringe from inflation valve
q 14. Ventilate with BVM and confirm tube placement:
 Observe immediate (within 6 breaths) EtCO2 waveform and number with capnography
 Watch for chest rise AND
 Auscultate abdomen, listening for air movement in the stomach to ensure tube is not esophageal
 Auscultate bilateral breath sounds to confirm tube placement
q 15. Observe oxygen saturation
Note: Regardless of apparent presence of lung sounds, tube misting, chest rise, AND/OR lack of gastric sounds:
if EtCO2 does NOT indicate proper tube location (alveolar waveform), ETT must be removed.
Procedures
P Paramedic
