# Section 124: 135

---

135
Adult Endotracheal Intubation - Procedures
Procedure (continued):
q 16. If unilateral right sided breath sounds are heard, consider:
 Right mainstem intubation
 Deflate the cuff and withdraw tube 1-2cm
 Reinflate cuff and repeat auscultation procedure as above for breath sounds
q 17. If bowel sounds heard with bagging or EtCO2 device does not indicate proper ETT placement, deflate cuff, remove tube and
ventilate with BVM for two minutes
 IF AND ONLY IF intubation attempted for medical reason AND unsuccessful on first attempt, may return to Step 7 of Procedure and
repeat
q 18. If intubation attempt unsuccessful, refer to the next step in the Airway Management, Adult protocol.
IF successful intubation confirmed by Steps 13-15 above:
q 19. Secure tube using an endotracheal securing device
q 20. Document depth of tube
q 21. Reassess and document lung sounds, Vital Signs and patient clinical status
q 22. Insert Oropharyngeal Airway (OPA), or use commercially available bite block with ET Tube holder (if available)
q 23. Ensure Cervical Spine is immobilized to prevent accidental dislodgement of ETT during procedures or patient movement
q 24. Continue ventilations at a rate of 8-10 breaths per minute; adjust rate to maintain SpO2 >93% and EtCO2 35-45mmHg, and as
appropriate for patient condition
q 25. Document EtCO2 waveform and reading continuously at time of EACH patient movement, including waveform and reading at
time of transfer of care at the Emergency Department.
Video Assisted Laryngoscopy (VAL)
q Video Assisted Laryngoscopy (VAL) shall be performed in accordance with documented manufacturer recommendations.
q Follow Intubation procedure with the addition of VAL technology .
q It is essential that every operator of a VAL be competent in Direct Laryngoscopy (DL) in preparation for unsuccessful VAL operation or
equipment malfunction.
Procedures
~ This Space Intentionally Left Blank ~
P Paramedic
P Paramedic
